W02 Learning Activity: CSS Box Model
Overview
The CSS Box Model is a box that wraps around every element. From the inside out, the model defines how the content, padding, border, and margin are rendered.

Prepare
Watch the following video:


Link: ▶️ The Box Model – [ 5:19 mins, 📄 Transcript ]

Here is a CSS rule for div elements that defines the width and box model. The content is 400 pixels wide and the height is driven by the actual (but not shown) content, whatever it happens to be.

div {
  width: 400px;
  margin: 10px;
  border: 1px solid #000000;
  padding: 15px;  
}
Box Model Labeled Dimensions w/out border-box
content: This is where the text and images appear.
padding: This is the area around the content and separates the content from the border.
border: The border goes around the padding and separates the padding from the margin.
margin: This is the area outside of the border and can extend beyond the physical characters of the box model.
Now apply the box-sizing property of border-box to this same example.
Note the difference in the content dimensions (blue shaded area):

div {
  box-sizing: border-box;
  width: 400px;
  margin: 10px;
  border: 1px solid #000000;
  padding: 15px;
}
Box Model Labeled Dimensions with border-box
CSS Shorthand Notation
CSS shorthand notation is generally considered best practice for conciseness, readability, and performance. However, longhand notation has its uses and can be more appropriate in certain situations where specificity is needed.

Summary: CSS Shorthand Declarations using the margin property
Longhand	Shorthand
margin-top: 10px;
margin-right: 20px;
margin-bottom: 30px;
margin-left: 40px;
margin: 10px 20px 30px 40px;
margin-top: 10px;
margin-right: 20px;
margin-bottom: 30px;
margin-left: 20px;
margin: 10px 20px 30px;
The right and left margins are the same at 20 pixels.
margin-top: 10px;
  margin-right: 20px;
  margin-bottom: 10px;
  margin-left: 20px;
margin: 10px 20px;
The top and bottom are the same (10 pixels) and right and left margins are the same (20 pixels).
margin-top: 10px;
  margin-right: 10px;
  margin-bottom: 10px;
  margin-left: 10px;
margin: 10px;
All sides of the margin are the same 10 pixels.
Common Border Shorthand
border: 1px solid rgb(0 0 0 / 10%);
This applies a 1 pixel border around the element with a solid line and a color that match the background of the containing/parent element. The color is set to 10% opacity.

Activity Instructions
Files
In your week02 folder, open the file named box-model.html.
In the styles subfolder within the week02 folder, open the CSS file named box-model.css.
HTML
In the box-model.html HTML file, create a link to the CSS file box-model.css using the <link> tag.
Make sure this <link> element is located within the <head> section.
Check Your Understanding
<link rel="stylesheet" href="styles/box-model.css">
Open the box-model.html file in Live Server or Five Server to view the changes as they happen in this activity.
At this point, the HTML renders as shown here:
Screenshot of box model HTML file at the start.
Screenshot of Box Model HTML File Rendered in a Browser
CSS
Use the CSS selectors to style the HTML elements to match the style shown in this image:
Screenshot of example solution for box model activity.
Screenshot of Example Solution
Write CSS declarations to style the HTML elements in the box-model.css file.
Note that the CSS rules have been started with the appropriate selectors.
the callout class
img element within the callout class
blockquote element
cite element
Use the following summary of declarations as a guide:
Element	Required CSS Declarations
callout class	maximum width, margin, border, padding, background color, and text color
image	position (float), margin, border, padding, background color, width, height
blockquote	margin
cite	display, top border, top padding, text alignment, size of font
Compare your work to the example solution provided that is named box-model-solution.html.
Did you notice the semantic HTML elements used to encase the scripture and scripture reference?

The scripture was encased with a <blockquote> element versus a generic <div> or <p> element

The scripture reference was encased with a <cite> element.

There is nothing special about these elements except their semantic names and maybe, default styling by the browser. Otherwise they behave and look like any other block element.

Do not worry if you did not use these in your design. Refactoring work as you discover new elements and methods is part of the overall development process.

Optional Solution Discussion
Video Demonstration: ▶️ Activity Walkthrough – [ 5 minutes ]
Optional Resources
An Introduction to the CSS Box Model – MDN